---
layout: post
title: "Suffering, Dominic Cummings and Panpsychism"
description: "PST #29"
tags: [pst]
---

I am extremely lucky to be part of a group that regularly talks about such
things. I left humbled but satisfied. It tickles that part of me that needs the
world to be wider than coronavirus, Trump and Brexit.

Here a few of the things I found most interesting from the night. I offer no
advice or information. Because...

> "What have they [the readers] done for us?" - [Alhan](https://youtu.be/kSL94Mc6n84?t=379)

Instead I offer collection of curious things that were new to me.

## Should we strive to eradicate suffering? Or is there value within it?

Feast your eyes on this:

> "You are a soul in heaven waiting to be allocated a life on Earth. It is late Friday afternoon, and you watch anxiously as the supply of available lives dwindles. When your turn comes, the angel in charge offers you a choice between two lives, that of the composer Joseph Haydn and that of an oyster.
> 
> Besides composing some wonderful music and influencing the evolution of the symphony, Haydn will meet with success and honour in his own lifetime, be cheerful and popular, travel and gain much enjoyment from field sports.
> 
> The oyster's life is far less exciting. Though this is rather a sophisticated oyster, its life will consist only of mild sensual pleasure, rather like that experienced by humans when floating very drunk in a warm bath.
> 
> When you request the life of Haydn, the angel sighs, ‘I'll never get rid of this oyster life. It's been hanging around for ages. Look, I'll offer you a special deal. Haydn will die at the age of seventy-seven. But I'll make the oyster life as long as you like...’" - [Roger Crisp (Mill on Utilitarianism, 1997)](https://www.utilitarianism.com/haydn-oyster.html)

Everyone picks Haydn. Obviously!

How about if we make this story more realistic? The angel explains that he will
suffer like a normal human being, that is to say longer and more intensely
than he will enjoy his successes. He will experience jealousy, failure,
[beatings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Haydn#Struggles_as_a_freelancer), 
[loss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Haydn#Retirement,_illness,_and_death)
and so on. On the other hand, the angel offers an indefinitely long life of mild sensual
pleasure in tropical waters experienced by the [immortal jellyfish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turritopsis_dohrnii).

Does that change things? Of course not.

But it does make me think about how I trade off my suffering. Because I have not
yet pulled off a balance as graceful as the jellyfish.

## Destroy and rebuild: the Dominic Cummings approach to government reform

From the sounds of it, nobody entertained his ideas. Despite the group feeling
as though his [job ad](https://dominiccummings.com/2020/01/02/two-hands-are-a-lot-were-hiring-data-scientists-project-managers-policy-experts-assorted-weirdos/)
was targeted at them.

Afterwards, I was referred to Jordan Peterson quote on the type of conversation
left-wing liberals enjoy engaging in. I found this,

> A society that’s only composed of the left-leaning liberal types is very good
> at generating all sorts of new possibilities but very bad at generating all
> sorts of new actualities. - [JP](https://www.jordanbpeterson.com/transcripts/oxford-union/)

I think there is some truth in it. As a left-leaning idealist, I do check
myself. But when looking outward, I know better than to generalise on such a
trait based on someone's political beliefs.

## Panpsychism

As soon as this topic was proposed people were excited enough to argue about
it's definition. I am still convinced that nobody knows. Nevertheless, it's an
emerging field of research that's getting a bit of attention.

Something that does seem clearer to me is that it's about tackling the
"hard problem":

> It is undeniable that some organisms are subjects of experience. But the
> question of how it is that these systems are subjects of experience is
> perplexing. Why is it that when our cognitive systems engage in visual and
> auditory information-processing, we have visual or auditory experience:
> the quality of deep blue, the sensation of middle C? How can we explain
> why there is something it is like to entertain a mental image, or to
> experience an emotion? It is widely agreed that experience arises from a
> physical basis, but we have no good explanation of why and how it so
> arises. Why should physical processing give rise to a rich inner life at
> all? It seems objectively unreasonable that it should, and yet it does. -
> [David Chalmers](http://consc.net/papers/facing.pdf)

A nice reminder of how ridiculous this condition is.

And a very ambitious area of research.
